wiki/contributing.md, before:

# Contributing to Eclosion

Thank you for your interest in contributing! This guide will help you get started.

## Code of Conduct

Please be respectful and constructive in all interactions. Contributors of all experience levels are welcome.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.12+
- Node.js 20+
- Docker (optional, for containerized development)

### Development Setup

1. **Clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/GraysonCAdams/eclosion-for-monarch.git
   cd eclosion
   ```

2. **Backend setup**
   ```bash
   # Create virtual environment (recommended)
   python -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

   # Install dependencies
   pip install -r requirements-dev.txt

   # Install pre-commit hooks
   pre-commit install

   # Start the API server
   python app.py
   ```

3. **Frontend setup**
   ```bash
   cd frontend
   npm install
   npm run dev
   ```

4. **Full stack with Docker**
   ```bash
   docker compose up --build
   ```

### Environment Variables

Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and configure:
- `FLASK_DEBUG=1` - Enable debug mode for development
- See `.env.example` for all available options

## Making Changes

### Branch Naming

Use descriptive branch names:
- `feature/add-dark-mode` - New features
- `fix/login-validation` - Bug fixes
- `docs/update-readme` - Documentation
- `refactor/api-cleanup` - Code refactoring

### Commit Messages

Write clear, concise commit messages:
- Use present tense ("Add feature" not "Added feature")
- Use imperative mood ("Fix bug" not "Fixes bug")
- Reference issues when applicable ("Fix #123")

Example:
```
Add category emoji customization

- Add emoji picker component to category settings
- Store emoji preference in state manager
- Update category display across dashboard

Closes #45
```

## Pull Request Process

1. **Create a branch** from `main`
2. **Make your changes** with clear commits
3. **Run quality checks locally**:
   ```bash
   # Frontend
   cd frontend
   npm run lint
   npm run type-check
   npm run build

   # Backend
   ruff check .
   ruff format --check .
   ```
4. **Push and create a PR** with a clear description
5. **Address review feedback** promptly
6. **Squash or rebase** if requested before merge

### PR Requirements

- All CI checks must pass
- Changes must be reviewed by a maintainer
- Update documentation if applicable
- Add tests for new functionality (when test infrastructure exists)

## Code Style

### Python (Backend)

- Follow PEP 8 with Ruff for linting and formatting
- Use type hints for function parameters and return values
- Keep functions focused and under 50 lines when possible

```python
@app.route("/api/example", methods=["POST"])
@async_flask
async def example_route() -> Response:
    """Brief description of what this route does."""
    data = request.get_json()
    result = await service.process(data)
    return jsonify(result)
```

### TypeScript (Frontend)

- Use TypeScript strict mode
- Define types in `src/types/`
- Use the API client from `src/api/client.ts` for all backend calls
- Follow React hooks best practices

```typescript
// Use typed API functions
import { fetchDashboard } from '@/api/client';

// Define props interfaces
interface ComponentProps {
  title: string;
  onAction: () => void;
}

// Use functional components with hooks
export function Component({ title, onAction }: ComponentProps) {
  // ...
}
```

### Tailwind CSS

- Use utility classes, avoid custom CSS when possible
- Follow existing component patterns in `src/components/`
- Use Tailwind's responsive prefixes for mobile support

## Testing

### Backend Tests

```bash
# Run all tests
pytest

# Run with coverage
pytest --cov=. --cov-report=html

# Run specific test file
pytest tests/test_savings_calculator.py
```

### Frontend Tests

```bash
cd frontend

# Run tests
npm test

# Run with UI
npm run test:ui

# Run with coverage
npm run test:coverage
```

## Architecture Overview

### Backend Structure

```
api.py              # Flask routes and app configuration
app.py              # Application entry point
core/               # Core utilities (logging, encryption, config)
services/           # Business logic services
  sync_service.py   # Main sync orchestration
  credentials_service.py  # Auth and encryption
state/              # State management and persistence
  state_manager.py  # JSON-based state persistence
tests/              # Backend tests
```

### Frontend Structure

```
frontend/src/
  api/              # API client for backend communication
  components/       # React components
  constants/        # Application constants
  context/          # React context providers
  hooks/            # Custom React hooks
  pages/            # Page-level components
  test/             # Test utilities and setup
  types/            # TypeScript type definitions
  utils/            # Utility functions
```

### Key Patterns

1. **State Management**: Use `StateManager` for persistence, never modify JSON directly
2. **API Calls**: Use typed functions from `frontend/src/api/client.ts`
3. **Error Handling**: Return proper HTTP status codes with JSON error messages
4. **Types**: Import from `../types` - types are organized by domain

## Questions?

- Open a GitHub Discussion for questions
- Check existing issues before creating new ones
- See [[Security|security]] for security-related questions

Commit message:

fix: allow automated PRs to pass required status checks
- Update require-develop.yml to allow release-please and productboard-sync branches
- Update security.yml to always report status even when no security-relevant files change
- Fix contributing docs to clarify Git Flow (branch from develop, not main)

wiki/contributing.md, after:

# Contributing to Eclosion

Thank you for your interest in contributing! This guide will help you get started.

## Code of Conduct

Please be respectful and constructive in all interactions. Contributors of all experience levels are welcome.

## Getting Started

### Prerequisites

- Python 3.12+
- Node.js 20+
- Docker (optional, for containerized development)

### Development Setup

1. **Clone the repository**
   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/GraysonCAdams/eclosion-for-monarch.git
   cd eclosion
   ```

2. **Backend setup**
   ```bash
   # Create virtual environment (recommended)
   python -m venv venv
   source venv/bin/activate  # On Windows: venv\Scripts\activate

   # Install dependencies
   pip install -r requirements-dev.txt

   # Install pre-commit hooks
   pre-commit install

   # Start the API server
   python app.py
   ```

3. **Frontend setup**
   ```bash
   cd frontend
   npm install
   npm run dev
   ```

4. **Full stack with Docker**
   ```bash
   docker compose up --build
   ```

### Environment Variables

Copy `.env.example` to `.env` and configure:
- `FLASK_DEBUG=1` - Enable debug mode for development
- See `.env.example` for all available options

## Making Changes

### Branch Naming

Use descriptive branch names:
- `feature/add-dark-mode` - New features
- `fix/login-validation` - Bug fixes
- `docs/update-readme` - Documentation
- `refactor/api-cleanup` - Code refactoring

### Commit Messages

Write clear, concise commit messages:
- Use present tense ("Add feature" not "Added feature")
- Use imperative mood ("Fix bug" not "Fixes bug")
- Reference issues when applicable ("Fix #123")

Example:
```
Add category emoji customization

- Add emoji picker component to category settings
- Store emoji preference in state manager
- Update category display across dashboard

Closes #45
```

## Pull Request Process

This repository uses Git Flow. All changes go through the `develop` branch before reaching `main`:

1. **Create a branch** from `develop`
2. **Make your changes** with clear commits
3. **Run quality checks locally**:
   ```bash
   # Frontend
   cd frontend
   npm run lint
   npm run type-check
   npm run build

   # Backend
   ruff check .
   ruff format --check .
   ```
4. **Push and create a PR** targeting `develop` with a clear description
5. **Address review feedback** promptly
6. **Squash or rebase** if requested before merge
7. **Changes are tested on beta.eclosion.app** before maintainers merge `develop` to `main`

### PR Requirements

- All CI checks must pass
- Changes must be reviewed by a maintainer
- Update documentation if applicable
- Add tests for new functionality (when test infrastructure exists)

## Code Style

### Python (Backend)

- Follow PEP 8 with Ruff for linting and formatting
- Use type hints for function parameters and return values
- Keep functions focused and under 50 lines when possible

```python
@app.route("/api/example", methods=["POST"])
@async_flask
async def example_route() -> Response:
    """Brief description of what this route does."""
    data = request.get_json()
    result = await service.process(data)
    return jsonify(result)
```

### TypeScript (Frontend)

- Use TypeScript strict mode
- Define types in `src/types/`
- Use the API client from `src/api/client.ts` for all backend calls
- Follow React hooks best practices

```typescript
// Use typed API functions
import { fetchDashboard } from '@/api/client';

// Define props interfaces
interface ComponentProps {
  title: string;
  onAction: () => void;
}

// Use functional components with hooks
export function Component({ title, onAction }: ComponentProps) {
  // ...
}
```

### Tailwind CSS

- Use utility classes, avoid custom CSS when possible
- Follow existing component patterns in `src/components/`
- Use Tailwind's responsive prefixes for mobile support

## Testing

### Backend Tests

```bash
# Run all tests
pytest

# Run with coverage
pytest --cov=. --cov-report=html

# Run specific test file
pytest tests/test_savings_calculator.py
```

### Frontend Tests

```bash
cd frontend

# Run tests
npm test

# Run with UI
npm run test:ui

# Run with coverage
npm run test:coverage
```

## Architecture Overview

### Backend Structure

```
api.py              # Flask routes and app configuration
app.py              # Application entry point
core/               # Core utilities (logging, encryption, config)
services/           # Business logic services
  sync_service.py   # Main sync orchestration
  credentials_service.py  # Auth and encryption
state/              # State management and persistence
  state_manager.py  # JSON-based state persistence
tests/              # Backend tests
```

### Frontend Structure

```
frontend/src/
  api/              # API client for backend communication
  components/       # React components
  constants/        # Application constants
  context/          # React context providers
  hooks/            # Custom React hooks
  pages/            # Page-level components
  test/             # Test utilities and setup
  types/            # TypeScript type definitions
  utils/            # Utility functions
```

### Key Patterns

1. **State Management**: Use `StateManager` for persistence, never modify JSON directly
2. **API Calls**: Use typed functions from `frontend/src/api/client.ts`
3. **Error Handling**: Return proper HTTP status codes with JSON error messages
4. **Types**: Import from `../types` - types are organized by domain

## Questions?

- Open a GitHub Discussion for questions
- Check existing issues before creating new ones
- See [[Security|security]] for security-related questions
